events/m2: Add M2 summary (#42)
open-education-hub/open-education-hub-site: website/docs/events/m2.md

# Workshop: Multiplier Event 3

## Schedule

- Date: Monday, February 27, 2023
- Place: University of Iceland

## Meeting Notes

### Background

> The existing [SmileyTutor (formerly tutor-web)](https://tutor-web.net/) has been in development and use at the University of Iceland (UI) for two decades and used for thousands of students in Kenya as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The existing [SmileyTutor (formerly tutor-web)](https://tutor-web.net/) has been in development and use at the University of Iceland (UI) for two decades and used by thousands of students in Kenya as well.
```

> In M2 and in the Icelandic case study in general it is therefore of primary interest to check out synergies between SmileyTutor and OpenEdu as well as how the projects complement each other.

Reviewer: It's a bit weird to say "case study". It sounds too much like a one-off experiment. Maybe mention CCAS earlier and just use that?

Reviewer 2: Agreed

This includes feedback on how much of the SmileyTutor functionality can and should be implemented in OpenEdu as well as how the experience in either system can be used to affect the development of the other.

Another technology, [EDBOOK](https://edbook.hi.is/), has been developed at UI as a content storage system for books and handouts related to courses in mathematics and statistics.  

> The multiplier event was used to extensively demonstrate the second content repository of OpenEdu, namely the primary Icelandic case study which is the course Computer and Calculus for Applied Statistics (CCAS).

Reviewer: @razvand any chance to publish the CCAS content on `github.io` any time soon so we can link it here?

Material in the course originally includes course notes in SmileyTutor, student submissions of answers to multiple-choice drills, student-submissions of examples and drills as well as peer-review.

> It was decided to put this course at the centre of discussions since it contains all issues relevant to comparing, linking or migrating SmileyTutor functionality with or into OpenEdu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was decided to put this course at the centre of discussions since it contains all issues relevant to comparing, linking or migrating the SmileyTutor functionality with or into OpenEdu.
```

For M2, a general discussion was organised to go through the OpenEdu principles in the light of all the requirements implied by CCAS as this is the one course with the most extensive use of all SmileyTutor functionality.

> ### On formats and content types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### On Formats and Content Types
```

A part of the M2 discussion was on data structures.

> It was noted that it is generically important to try to enforce a split between the presentation mechanism (e.g. `PDF`, `HTML`) and internal data (text format content, images  etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was noted that it is generically important to try to enforce a split between the presentation mechanism (e.g. `PDF`, `HTML`) and internal data (text format content, images, etc).
```

> The “data” should be according to a prespecified format, aka a database of content, and the user should be able to choose an appropriate “view” from the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "data" should be according to a prespecified format, aka a database of content, and the user should be able to choose an appropriate "view" from the database.
```
Go through the whole document and change all quotes to ASCII.

This approach was taken when initially designing SmileyTutor but was always problematic and has not been followed up on in recent generations of the system.

> Specifically, in the earliest implementations of the SmileyTutor, the system included a mechanism for storing general educational content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, in the earliest implementations of SmileyTutor, the system included a mechanism for storing general educational content.
```

> This content included presentation slides as well as course notes in a unified form and was subsequently presented as web pages or PDF versions of slides and course notes.

Reviewer: A link or some other example may be useful here.

Reviewer 2: OK, can anyone help me and properly format the following?

An example of this is seen at https://tutor-web.net/stats/stats6254suff which is a short tutorial on the concept of sufficiency in mathematical statistics. This web page include a button to update the "tutorial PDF", which will bring together all material in the underlying hierarchy and run it through LaTEX to  generate a single PDF file of "course notes".

Further down in the same hierarchy the tutorial is split into "lectures", each of which corresponds to a "drillset". Within the lecture, general material is split into components corresponding to individual slides. An example of the slide structure is given in https://tutor-web.net/stats/stats6254suff/lecture10/sl05 which has a base text to become formatted as a slide or a text box in the overall PDF file. The slide also has a "handout" which becomes a section in the PDF file.

These complete options have only been used in 5-6 courses in the tutor-web and are unlikely to be supported or maintained in the future SmileyTutor.

The approach was eventually abandoned and the current aim is for OpenEdu to serve this role instead.

CCAS is an example of a course which extensively uses this now-obsolete feature of SmileyTutor.

> The process of migrating CCAS course notes from SmileyTutor into OpenEdu is therefore a particularly important part of the case study.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process of migrating the CCAS course notes from SmileyTutor into OpenEdu is therefore a particularly important part of the case study.
```

> This is the first important link between the two systems: Migrating course notes from SmileyTutor into OpenEdu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the first important link between the two systems: migrating course notes from SmileyTutor into OpenEdu.
```

> ### Choice of viewer and hurdles to adoption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Choice of Viewer and Hurdles to Adoption
```

> A discussion was had as to what a sensible “viewer” would be for the CCAS course notes.

Reviewer: It's not exactly a viewer, but a presentation framework.

The OpenEdu framework is currently using a custom viewer, [revealMD](https://github.com/webpro/reveal-md), that allows for significantly more functionality than a typical Markdown file.
However, some participants had previous experience with trying to get others to adopt various digital solutions and each additional system that a creator needed to understand decreased the likelihood of adoption.

However, even “out of the box” viewers do not always give the same results for “plain” Markdown.

> In particular, GitHub’s viewer had significant trouble with even simple LaTeX code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, GitHub's viewer had significant trouble with even simple LaTeX code.
```
Same for single quotes.

While workarounds were found, when GitHub fixed their rendering errors, they broke some of the workarounds, demonstrating the difficulties of working with views that might change with time.

> ### Purpose of student submissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Purpose of Student Submissions
```

> An extensive discussion was undertaken on the nature of student submissions in the SmileyTutor and in OpenEdu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An extensive discussion was undertaken on the nature of student submissions in SmileyTutor and in OpenEdu.
```

A typical example of a student-authored drill in an introductory calculus course is `What is 1+1?`.
Another example is a common “Adequate” or even “Good” grade for a “Quality of descriptive graph” when no graph was in fact submitted.

Methods in SmileyTutor have been implemented to force students to use the full grading scale for peer-review, to fight grade inflation and to avoid some of these issues.

In spite of all of this, a large number of submissions which receive high peer-grades are not of the quality to be acceptable as a part of course material in any sense.

To counter the last of these issues, submissions which have received a good peer-review (possibly after resubmission) may be subjected to a review by a vetted reviewer (the instructor) in SmileyTutor.
An exercise or drill which has been deemed of high quality following these reviews can be considered for inclusion in current or future course material.

These multiple uses of authoring, peer-review and vetted review are not seen as fundamental or obvious parts of OpenEdu.

However, OpenEdu has at its core a storage mechanism which can be used to store vetted student-submissions into SmileyTutor.

> This leads to the second important link between the two systems: Storing SmileyTutor student-submissions in OpenEdu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leads to the second important link between the two systems: storing SmileyTutor student submissions in OpenEdu.
```
And actually OpenEdu is not storage. The storage is GitHub (via repositories), while OpenEdu is the philosophy and organisation that aggregates these repositories.

Author: Also, I don't think that submissions are going to be stored on GitHub, are they?

Reviewer: That too, but it may depend on what you mean by "submissions". If they're like assignment solutions and quiz answers, then no, of course, but contributions such as fixes and improvements may also be regarded as submissions somehow. The term is just vague.

Reviewer 2: We mean "student submissions of complete examples or drills", which are to become peer-reviewed and optionally revewed by a vetted reviewer, possibly ending up in the final material collection in the github collection of examples and drills...

(We've always assumed that the OpenEdu project would take the storage of these in one way or another, since we do not have a nice way of merging student-submitted items into the general item database...)

This second link has not been implemented yet and was therefore not discussed further at M2.

> ### Migration issues: The CCAS course notes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migration Issues: The CCAS Course Notes
```

> The meeting was presented with a fairly large number of issues involved in migrating the CCAS course notes into the current OpenEdu system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the meeting, a large number of issues involved in migrating the CCAS course notes into the current OpenEdu system were presented.
```

Chief among them being the interplay between Markdown and LaTeX within GitHub’s Markdown viewer.

> A short demonstration was given on the conversion workflow, which utilised a reasonable automatic LaTeX-to-Markdown converter, but had to be both pre- and post-processed by some fairly sophisticated python scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A short demonstration was given on the conversion workflow, which utilised a reasonable automatic LaTeX-to-Markdown converter, but had to be both pre- and post-processed by some fairly sophisticated Python scripts.
```

In addition, almost all of the images in the notes were being generated from R scripts.
As such functionality is obviously not reproducible with base Markdown, the scripts for the images were run locally and the resulting images could be referenced by Markdown.

Some comments followed on the difficulties and nature of repurposing content within education.

> ### Rewarding students

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Rewarding Students
```

Students are commonly rewarded using grades but can also be rewarded for work using other currencies such as smiley faces or points.

> The SmileyCoin cryptocurrency is well established as a reward mechanism in the SmileyTutor and will be included in OpenEdu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SmileyCoin cryptocurrency is well established as a reward mechanism in SmileyTutor and will be included in OpenEdu.
```

A real-world course can use either system and students will be able to redeem [SmileyCoin](https://smileyco.in/#/) for appropriate answers or submissions as the case may be.
The SmileyCoin is an example of transferring technology from SmileyTutor to OpenEdu.

Within SmileyTutor an elaborate item allocation algorithm has been established for assigning the next drill to a student and a correspondingly elaborate weighting mechanism for grading has been established to emphasise learning-by-doing rather than examining students.

> The approaches taken by SmileyTutor and OpenEdu are fundamentally different.

Reviewer: How? Aren't we planning to do the same (and already are doing it for the Operating Systems course)?

Author: I wouldn't know how to answer this question. We should ask @gstefans

Reviewer 2: OK, I suppose more detail should be added. The SmileyTutor approach is **mostly** about (drill) items, 
(1) storing them, and 
(2) presenting to students using a very elaborate (randomly chosen) item-allocation-algorithm and
(3) grading them using a (randomly chosen and weighted) grading mechanism which allows people to start ignorant but learn
(4) use SmileyCoin as an incentive system
(5) controlling every aspect of every piece of functionality using parameters which can be set random for each student, leading to large data sets which are used for statistical analyses in research papers

Apart from SmileyCoin (4), all of this is a minor (nonexistent?) part of OpenEdu. 

The old tutor-web used to also deal with general content storage, and this had much more overlap with the OpenEdu concept. However, this has been deleted from the most recent tutor-web version - so beta.tutor-web.net currently just links to a pdf file stored in the old tutor-web.net, which will eventually become obsolete.

> ### Using OpenEdu as content storage: Course notes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using OpenEdu as Content Storage: Course Notes
```

> Once course notes have been set up in OpenEdu along with a compiled PDF file, it is trivial to insert a link to the PDF file from SmileyTutor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once course notes have been set up in OpenEdu along with a compiled PDF file, it is trivial to insert a link to the PDF file from SmileyTutor.
```
Ideally we wouldn't store binary files (such as PDFs) on GitHub, but rather implement some sort of a builder to create it, host it on a given platform, and then point SmileyTutor to that generated PDF instead.

Reviewer 2: Fair enouth - can you please suggest a better wording?

This facility already exists.

Having OpenEdu as a content storage for this type of material will be very useful and will save on SmileyTutor development.
This is the third link between the systems: Students will be able to retrieve course handouts from OpenEdu using a single click from SmileyTutor.

> ### Using OpenEdu as content storage: Drill collections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using OpenEdu as Content Storage: Drill Collections
```
